---
layout: post
category: fellows
title: "Introducing DSSG Fellow Mitchell Goist"
date: "2017-07-1"
author: Mitchell Goist
---

<img src="{{ site.url }}/assets/images/me.jpg" alt="mitch" width="200px">

I'm coming to DSSG after finishing the fourth year of my program in Political
Science at Penn State. My dissertation is focused on state--sponsored death
squads in El Salvador and South Africa. I use Natural Language Processing (NLP)
techniques to extract information from Truth and Reconciliation testimony in
order to analyze the organization of death squads. The social
sciences often has a breadth of qualitative, textual evidence, but a dearth of
high quality data, so I am bullish on the contribution that information
extraction techniques, such as the ones I use for my disseration, can have in
studying social phenomena.

<!--excerpt-->

Data Science for the Social Good often sounds like buzzword alphabet soup to my
non-academic friends, so perhaps I can point them to this blog after it's
published for a little clarification. To me, data science is the more
ambiguous term, but it refers to computationally intensive techniques to solve
statistical problems. Most of these techniques, such as neural networks or
Bayesian modelling have been around for decades, but researchers haven't had
the computing resources to implement them. This has particularly impacted the
field of statistics, as most modern statistical techniques, are designed to
minimize the computing power or amount of data necessary to arrive at some
inference. Now that neither of those concerns are typically valid for current
researchers, data science presents a departure from typical methods, while
being wholly in line with statistical theory.

Social good is even trickier to pin down, and it's tempting to go with the
cliched Supreme Court pornography definition: you know it when you see it.
However, despite what we may think, we often don't know what the social good is
when we see it, and we certainly don't know how to achieve it. History is
replete with examples of well--intentioned people making horrible and
consequential decisions in the name of the social good. We could, of course,
dismiss these people as misguided idiots, and, since (ostensibly) we don't
think of ourselves as misguided idiots, problem solved! But as people who
thinks probabilistically (being data scientists and all), it's likely we're
at the same position in both the intellect and common sense distributions as
our blundering forebearers.

Take, for example, international development, a subject that I spent my first
two years of graduate school studying. In the immediate aftermath of
decolonization, the largest recipients of foreign aid were Congo and Somalia. Foreign donors continued to gush about Rwanda as a development success story up until the genocide. Not exactly a picture of economic and political success!

The consistent failure of otherwise well-intentioned individuals to achieve
social good outcomes points us to an inescapable fact. Social processes are
hard to study! Think of how difficult it is to create an accurate model of
decision-making processes in a single individual. Now imagine the complexity in
measure the collective decision--making processes of multitudes of individuals,
acting under an intricate web of institutions, affected by long--running
historical factors, and then projected over time. Yikes!

There has been some (very legitimate) concern about "technological solutionism"
or the potential for data science approaches to social good problems obscuring
political realities or blinding researchers to their own biases. However, data
science done right should lead to an enormous and abiding sense of deep
skepticism. To return to the develpoment example this changes the questions
being asked by researchers from "can countries enact necessary economic reforms
under democratic governments" (an awfully complex question that is hopeless to
answer scientifically), to "if I give someone 1000 USD in cash, does this make
them less poor a year later when I visit?"

I recently finished a book about a Zen monk's search for englightenment called
"An Ongoing Lesson in the Extent of My Own Stupidity." In many ways, this is a
perfect title for DSSG, although it probably won't help me explain it to my
friends.
